<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Bayous West of the Mississippi⁠—Criticisms of the Northern Press⁠—Running the Batteries⁠—Loss of the Indianola⁠—Disposition of the Troops.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The original canal scheme was also abandoned on the <time datetime="1863-03-27">27th of March</time>. The effort to make a waterway through Lake Providence and the connecting bayous was abandoned as wholly impracticable about the same time.</p>
			<p>At Milliken’s Bend, and also at Young’s Point, bayous or channels start, which connecting with other bayous passing Richmond, Louisiana, enter the Mississippi at Carthage twenty-five or thirty miles above Grand Gulf. The Mississippi levee cuts the supply of water off from these bayous or channels, but all the rainfall behind the levee, at these points, is carried through these same channels to the river below. In case of a crevasse in this vicinity, the water escaping would find its outlet through the same channels. The dredges and laborers from the canal having been driven out by overflow and the enemy’s batteries, I determined to open these other channels, if possible. If successful the effort would afford a route, away from the enemy’s batteries, for our transports. There was a good road back of the levees, along these bayous, to carry the troops, artillery and wagon trains over whenever the water receded a little, and after a few days of dry weather. Accordingly, with the abandonment of all the other plans for reaching a base heretofore described, this new one was undertaken.</p>
			<p>As early as the <time datetime="1863-02-04">4th of February</time> I had written to Halleck about this route, stating that I thought it much more practicable than the other undertaking (the Lake Providence route), and that it would have been accomplished with much less labor if commenced before the water had got all over the country.</p>
			<p>The upper end of these bayous being cut off from a water supply, further than the rainfall back of the levees, was grown up with dense timber for a distance of several miles from their source. It was necessary, therefore, to clear this out before letting in the water from the river. This work was continued until the waters of the river began to recede and the road to Richmond, Louisiana, emerged from the water. One small steamer and some barges were got through this channel, but no further use could be made of it because of the fall in the river. Beyond this it was no more successful than the other experiments with which the winter was whiled away. All these failures would have been very discouraging if I had expected much from the efforts; but I had not. From the first the most I hoped to accomplish was the passage of transports, to be used below Vicksburg, without exposure to the long line of batteries defending that city.</p>
			<p>This long, dreary and, for heavy and continuous rains and high water, unprecedented winter was one of great hardship to all engaged about Vicksburg. The river was higher than its natural banks from <time datetime="1862-12">December, 1862</time>, to the following <time datetime="1863-04">April</time>. The war had suspended peaceful pursuits in the South, further than the production of army supplies, and in consequence the levees were neglected and broken in many places and the whole country was covered with water. Troops could scarcely find dry ground on which to pitch their tents. Malarial fevers broke out among the men. Measles and smallpox also attacked them. The hospital arrangements and medical attendance were so perfect, however, that the loss of life was much less than might have been expected. Visitors to the camps went home with dismal stories to relate; Northern papers came back to the soldiers with these stories exaggerated. Because I would not divulge my ultimate plans to visitors, they pronounced me idle, incompetent and unfit to command men in an emergency, and clamored for my removal. They were not to be satisfied, many of them, with my simple removal, but named who my successor should be. McClernand, Fremont, Hunter and McClellan were all mentioned in this connection. I took no steps to answer these complaints, but continued to do my duty, as I understood it, to the best of my ability. Everyone has his superstitions. One of mine is that in positions of great responsibility everyone should do his duty to the best of his ability where assigned by competent authority, without application or the use of influence to change his position. While at Cairo I had watched with very great interest the operations of the Army of the Potomac, looking upon that as the main field of the war. I had no idea, myself, of ever having any large command, nor did I suppose that I was equal to one; but I had the vanity to think that as a cavalry officer I might succeed very well in the command of a brigade. On one occasion, in talking about this to my staff officers, all of whom were civilians without any military education whatever, I said that I would give anything if I were commanding a brigade of cavalry in the Army of the Potomac and I believed I could do some good. Captain Hillyer spoke up and suggested that I make application to be transferred there to command the cavalry. I then told him that I would cut my right arm off first, and mentioned this superstition.</p>
			<p>In time of war the President, being by the Constitution Commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy, is responsible for the selection of commanders. He should not be embarrassed in making his selections. I having been selected, my responsibility ended with my doing the best I knew how. If I had sought the place, or obtained it through personal or political influence, my belief is that I would have feared to undertake any plan of my own conception, and would probably have awaited direct orders from my distant superiors. Persons obtaining important commands by application or political influence are apt to keep a written record of complaints and predictions of defeat, which are shown in case of disaster. Somebody must be responsible for their failures.</p>
			<p>With all the pressure brought to bear upon them, both President Lincoln and General Halleck stood by me to the end of the campaign. I had never met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lincoln, but his support was constant.</p>
			<p>At last the waters began to recede; the roads crossing the peninsula behind the levees of the bayous, were emerging from the waters; the troops were all concentrated from distant points at Milliken’s Bend preparatory to a final move which was to crown the long, tedious and discouraging labors with success.</p>
			<p>I had had in contemplation the whole winter the movement by land to a point below Vicksburg from which to operate, subject only to the possible but not expected success of some one of the expedients resorted to for the purpose of giving us a different base. This could not be undertaken until the waters receded. I did not therefore communicate this plan, even to an officer of my staff, until it was necessary to make preparations for the start. My recollection is that Admiral Porter was the first one to whom I mentioned it. The cooperation of the navy was absolutely essential to the success (even to the contemplation) of such an enterprise. I had no more authority to command Porter than he had to command me. It was necessary to have part of his fleet below Vicksburg if the troops went there. Steamers to use as ferries were also essential. The navy was the only escort and protection for these steamers, all of which in getting below had to run about fourteen miles of batteries. Porter fell into the plan at once, and suggested that he had better superintend the preparation of the steamers selected to run the batteries, as sailors would probably understand the work better than soldiers. I was glad to accept his proposition, not only because I admitted his argument, but because it would enable me to keep from the enemy a little longer our designs. Porter’s fleet was on the east side of the river above the mouth of the Yazoo, entirely concealed from the enemy by the dense forests that intervened. Even spies could not get near him, on account of the undergrowth and overflowed lands. Suspicions of some mysterious movements were aroused. Our river guards discovered one day a small skiff moving quietly and mysteriously up the river near the east shore, from the direction of Vicksburg, towards the fleet. On overhauling the boat they found a small white flag, not much larger than a handkerchief, set up in the stern, no doubt intended as a flag of truce in case of discovery. The boat, crew and passengers were brought ashore to me. The chief personage aboard proved to be Jacob Thompson, Secretary of the Interior under the administration of President Buchanan. After a pleasant conversation of half an hour or more I allowed the boat and crew, passengers and all, to return to Vicksburg, without creating a suspicion that there was a doubt in my mind as to the good faith of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thompson and his flag.</p>
			<p>Admiral Porter proceeded with the preparation of the steamers for their hazardous passage of the enemy’s batteries. The great essential was to protect the boilers from the enemy’s shot, and to conceal the fires under the boilers from view. This he accomplished by loading the steamers, between the guards and boilers on the boiler deck up to the deck above, with bales of hay and cotton, and the deck in front of the boilers in the same way, adding sacks of grain. The hay and grain would be wanted below, and could not be transported in sufficient quantity by the muddy roads over which we expected to march.</p>
			<p>Before this I had been collecting, from <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis and Chicago, yawls and barges to be used as ferries when we got below. By the <time datetime="1863-04-16">16th of April</time> Porter was ready to start on his perilous trip. The advance, flagship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Benton</i>, Porter commanding, started at ten o’clock at night, followed at intervals of a few minutes by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lafayette</i> with a captured steamer, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Price</i>, lashed to her side, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Louisville</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mound City</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Pittsburgh</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Carondelet</i>⁠—all of these being naval vessels. Next came the transports⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Forest Queen</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Silver Wave</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henry Clay</i>, each towing barges loaded with coal to be used as fuel by the naval and transport steamers when below the batteries. The gunboat <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Tuscumbia</i> brought up the rear. Soon after the start a battery between Vicksburg and Warrenton opened fire across the intervening peninsula, followed by the upper batteries, and then by batteries all along the line. The gunboats ran up close under the bluffs, delivering their fire in return at short distances, probably without much effect. They were under fire for more than two hours and every vessel was struck many times, but with little damage to the gunboats. The transports did not fare so well. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henry Clay</i> was disabled and deserted by her crew. Soon after a shell burst in the cotton packed about the boilers, set the vessel on fire and burned her to the water’s edge. The burning mass, however, floated down to Carthage before grounding, as did also one of the barges in tow.</p>
			<p>The enemy were evidently expecting our fleet, for they were ready to light up the river by means of bonfires on the east side and by firing houses on the point of land opposite the city on the Louisiana side. The sight was magnificent, but terrible. I witnessed it from the deck of a river transport, run out into the middle of the river and as low down as it was prudent to go. My mind was much relieved when I learned that no one on the transports had been killed and but few, if any, wounded. During the running of the batteries men were stationed in the holds of the transports to partially stop with cotton shot-holes that might be made in the hulls. All damage was afterwards soon repaired under the direction of Admiral Porter.</p>
			<p>The experiment of passing batteries had been tried before this, however, during the war. Admiral Farragut had run the batteries at Port Hudson with the flagship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hartford</i> and one ironclad and visited me from below Vicksburg. The <time datetime="1863-02-13">13th of February</time> Admiral Porter had sent the gunboat <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Indianola</i>, Lieutenant-Commander George Brown commanding, below. She met Colonel Ellet of the Marine brigade below Natchez on a captured steamer. Two of the Colonel’s fleet had previously run the batteries, producing the greatest consternation among the people along the Mississippi from Vicksburg<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> to the Red River.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Indianola</i> remained about the mouth of the Red River some days, and then started up the Mississippi. The Confederates soon raised the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Queen of the West</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> and repaired her.</p>
			<p>With this vessel and the ram <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Webb</i>, which they had had for some time in the Red River, and two other steamers, they followed the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Indianola</i>. The latter was encumbered with barges of coal in tow, and consequently could make but little speed against the rapid current of the Mississippi. The Confederate fleet overtook her just above Grand Gulf, and attacked her after dark on the <time datetime="1863-02-24">24th of February</time>. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Indianola</i> was superior to all the others in armament, and probably would have destroyed them or driven them away, but for her encumbrance. As it was she fought them for an hour and a half, but, in the dark, was struck seven or eight times by the ram and other vessels, and was finally disabled and reduced to a sinking condition. The armament was thrown overboard and the vessel run ashore. Officers and crew then surrendered.</p>
			<p>I had started McClernand with his corps of four divisions on the <time datetime="1863-03-29">29th of March</time>, by way of Richmond, Louisiana, to New Carthage, hoping that he might capture Grand Gulf before the balance of the troops could get there; but the roads were very bad, scarcely above water yet. Some miles from New Carthage the levee to Bayou Vidal was broken in several places, overflowing the roads for the distance of two miles. Boats were collected from the surrounding bayous, and some constructed on the spot from such material as could be collected, to transport the troops across the overflowed interval. By the <time datetime="1863-04-06">6th of April</time> McClernand had reached New Carthage with one division and its artillery, the latter ferried through the woods by these boats. On the <time datetime="1863-04-17">17th</time> I visited New Carthage in person, and saw that the process of getting troops through in the way we were doing was so tedious that a better method must be devised. The water was falling, and in a few days there would not be depth enough to use boats; nor would the land be dry enough to march over. McClernand had already found a new route from Smith’s plantation where the crevasse occurred, to Perkins’ plantation, eight to twelve miles below New Carthage. This increased the march from Milliken’s Bend from twenty-seven to nearly forty miles. Four bridges had to be built across bayous, two of them each over six hundred feet long, making about two thousand feet of bridging in all. The river falling made the current in these bayous very rapid, increasing the difficulty of building and permanently fastening these bridges; but the ingenuity of the “Yankee soldier” was equal to any emergency. The bridges were soon built of such material as could be found near by, and so substantial were they that not a single mishap occurred in crossing all the army with artillery, cavalry and wagon trains, except the loss of one siege gun (a thirty-two pounder). This, if my memory serves me correctly, broke through the only pontoon bridge we had in all our march across the peninsula. These bridges were all built by McClernand’s command, under the supervision of Lieutenant Hains of the Engineer Corps.<a class="mapref" href="maps.xhtml#illustration-9">[Map 9]</a></p>
			<p>I returned to Milliken’s Bend on the <time datetime="1863-04-18">18th</time> or <time datetime="1863-04-19">19th</time>, and on the <time datetime="1863-04-20">20th</time> issued the following final order for the movement of troops:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Department of the Tennessee,</p>
					<p class="letter-location">Milliken’s Bend, Louisiana,</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><time datetime="1863-04-20">April 20, 1863</time>.</p>
					<p>Special Orders, <abbr>No.</abbr> 110.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. The following orders are published for the information and guidance of the “Army in the Field,” in its present movement to obtain a foothold on the east bank of the Mississippi River, from which Vicksburg can be approached by practicable roads.</p>
				<p><em>First</em>.⁠—The Thirteenth army corps, Major-General John <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> McClernand commanding, will constitute the right wing.</p>
				<p><em>Second</em>.⁠—The Fifteenth army corps, Major-General <abbr class="name">W. T.</abbr> Sherman commanding, will constitute the left wing.</p>
				<p><em>Third</em>.⁠—The Seventeenth army corps, Major-General James <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> McPherson commanding, will constitute the center.</p>
				<p><em>Fourth</em>.⁠—The order of march to New Carthage will be from right to left.</p>
				<p><em>Fifth</em>.⁠—Reserves will be formed by divisions from each army corps; or, an entire army corps will be held as a reserve, as necessity may require. When the reserve is formed by divisions, each division will remain under the immediate command of its respective corps commander, unless otherwise specially ordered for a particular emergency.</p>
				<p><em>Sixth</em>.⁠—Troops will be required to bivouac, until proper facilities can be afforded for the transportation of camp equipage.</p>
				<p><em>Seventh</em>.⁠—In the present movement, one tent will be allowed to each company for the protection of rations from rain; one wall tent for each regimental headquarters; one wall tent for each brigade headquarters; and one wall tent for each division headquarters; corps commanders having the books and blanks of their respective commands to provide for, are authorized to take such tents as are absolutely necessary, but not to exceed the number allowed by General Orders <abbr>No.</abbr> 160, <abbr class="initialism">A.G.O.</abbr>, series of <time datetime="1862">1862</time>.</p>
				<p><em>Eighth</em>.⁠—All the teams of the three army corps, under the immediate charge of the quartermasters bearing them on their returns, will constitute a train for carrying supplies and ordnance and the authorized camp equipage of the army.</p>
				<p><em>Ninth</em>.⁠—As fast as the Thirteenth army corps advances, the Seventeenth army corps will take its place; and it, in turn, will be followed in like manner by the Fifteenth army corps.</p>
				<p><em>Tenth</em>.⁠—Two regiments from each army corps will be detailed by corps commanders, to guard the lines from Richmond to New Carthage.</p>
				<p><em>Eleventh</em>.⁠—General hospitals will be established by the medical director between Duckport and Milliken’s Bend. All sick and disabled soldiers will be left in these hospitals. Surgeons in charge of hospitals will report convalescents as fast as they become fit for duty. Each corps commander will detail an intelligent and good drill officer, to remain behind and take charge of the convalescents of their respective corps; officers so detailed will organize the men under their charge into squads and companies, without regard to the regiments they belong to; and in the absence of convalescent commissioned officers to command them, will appoint noncommissioned officers or privates. The force so organized will constitute the guard of the line from Duckport to Milliken’s Bend. They will furnish all the guards and details required for general hospitals, and with the contrabands that may be about the camps, will furnish all the details for loading and unloading boats.</p>
				<p><em>Twelfth</em>.⁠—The movement of troops from Milliken’s Bend to New Carthage will be so conducted as to allow the transportation of ten days’ supply of rations, and one-half the allowance of ordnance, required by previous orders.</p>
				<p><em>Thirteenth</em>.⁠—Commanders are authorized and enjoined to collect all the beef cattle, corn and other necessary supplies on the line of march; but wanton destruction of property, taking of articles useless for military purposes, insulting citizens, going into and searching houses without proper orders from division commanders, are positively prohibited. All such irregularities must be summarily punished.</p>
				<p><em>Fourteenth</em>.⁠—Brigadier-General <abbr class="name">J. C.</abbr> Sullivan is appointed to the command of all the forces detailed for the protection of the line from here to New Carthage. His particular attention is called to General Orders, <abbr>No.</abbr> 69, from Adjutant-General’s Office, Washington, of date <time datetime="1863-03-20">March 20, 1863</time>.</p>
				<footer>
					<p>By order of</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">Major-General <abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>McClernand was already below on the Mississippi. Two of McPherson’s divisions were put upon the march immediately. The third had not yet arrived from Lake Providence; it was on its way to Milliken’s Bend and was to follow on arrival.</p>
			<p>Sherman was to follow McPherson. Two of his divisions were at Duckport and Young’s Point, and the third under Steele was under orders to return from Greenville, Mississippi, where it had been sent to expel a rebel battery that had been annoying our transports.</p>
			<p>It had now become evident that the army could not be rationed by a wagon train over the single narrow and almost impassable road between Milliken’s Bend and Perkins’ plantation. Accordingly six more steamers were protected as before, to run the batteries, and were loaded with supplies. They took twelve barges in tow, loaded also with rations. On the night of the <time datetime="1863-04-22">22d of April</time> they ran the batteries, five getting through more or less disabled while one was sunk. About half the barges got through with their needed freight.</p>
			<p>When it was first proposed to run the blockade at Vicksburg with river steamers there were but two captains or masters who were willing to accompany their vessels, and but one crew. Volunteers were called for from the army, men who had had experience in any capacity in navigating the western rivers. Captains, pilots, mates, engineers and deckhands enough presented themselves to take five times the number of vessels we were moving through this dangerous ordeal. Most of them were from Logan’s division, composed generally of men from the southern part of Illinois and from Missouri. All but two of the steamers were commanded by volunteers from the army, and all but one so manned. In this instance, as in all others during the war, I found that volunteers could be found in the ranks and among the commissioned officers to meet every call for aid whether mechanical or professional. Colonel <abbr class="name">W. S.</abbr> Oliver was master of transportation on this occasion by special detail.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
