<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 67</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-67" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Negotiations at Appomattox⁠—Interview with Lee at Mclean’s House⁠—The Terms of Surrender⁠—Lee’s Surrender⁠—Interview with Lee After the Surrender.</p>
			</header>
			<p>On the 8th I had followed the Army of the Potomac in rear of Lee. I was suffering very severely with a sick headache, [The old name for what we now call a Migraine Headache. D.W.] and stopped at a farmhouse on the road some distance in rear of the main body of the army. I spent the night in bathing my feet in hot water and mustard, and putting mustard plasters on my wrists and the back part of my neck, hoping to be cured by morning. During the night I received Lee’s answer to my letter of the 8th, inviting an interview between the lines on the following morning. [See Appendix.] But it was for a different purpose from that of surrendering his army, and I answered him as follows:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Armies of the <abbr>U. S.</abbr>,</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9, 1865.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">General <abbr class="name">R. E.</abbr> Lee,</p>
					<p>Commanding <abbr>C. S. A.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>Your note of yesterday is received. As I have no authority to treat on the subject of peace, the meeting proposed for ten <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> today could lead to no good. I will state, however, General, that I am equally anxious for peace with yourself, and the whole North entertains the same feeling. The terms upon which peace can be had are well understood. By the South laying down their arms they will hasten that most desirable event, save thousands of human lives and hundreds of millions of property not yet destroyed. Sincerely hoping that all our difficulties may be settled without the loss of another life, I subscribe myself, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
					<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I proceeded at an early hour in the morning, still suffering with the headache, to get to the head of the column. I was not more than two or three miles from Appomattox Court House at the time, but to go direct I would have to pass through Lee’s army, or a portion of it. I had therefore to move south in order to get upon a road coming up from another direction.</p>
			<p>When the white flag was put out by Lee, as already described, I was in this way moving towards Appomattox Court House, and consequently could not be communicated with immediately, and be informed of what Lee had done. Lee, therefore, sent a flag to the rear to advise Meade and one to the front to Sheridan, saying that he had sent a message to me for the purpose of having a meeting to consult about the surrender of his army, and asked for a suspension of hostilities until I could be communicated with. As they had heard nothing of this until the fighting had got to be severe and all going against Lee, both of these commanders hesitated very considerably about suspending hostilities at all. They were afraid it was not in good faith, and we had the Army of Northern Virginia where it could not escape except by some deception. They, however, finally consented to a suspension of hostilities for two hours to give an opportunity of communicating with me in that time, if possible. It was found that, from the route I had taken, they would probably not be able to communicate with me and get an answer back within the time fixed unless the messenger should pass through the rebel lines.</p>
			<p>Lee, therefore, sent an escort with the officer bearing this message through his lines to me.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9, 1865.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">General</span>: I received your note of this morning on the picket-line whither I had come to meet you and ascertain definitely what terms were embraced in your proposal of yesterday with reference to the surrender of this army. I now request an interview in accordance with the offer contained in your letter of yesterday for that purpose.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">R. E.</abbr> Lee, General.</p>
				</footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Lieutenant-General <abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant</p>
				<p>Commanding <abbr>U. S.</abbr> Armies.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When the officer reached me I was still suffering with the sick headache, but the instant I saw the contents of the note I was cured. I wrote the following note in reply and hastened on:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9, 1865.</p>
					<p>General <abbr class="name">R. E.</abbr> Lee,</p>
					<p>Commanding <abbr>C. S.</abbr> Armies.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Your note of this date is but this moment (11.50 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>) received, in consequence of my having passed from the Richmond and Lynchburg road to the Farmville and Lynchburg road. I am at this writing about four miles west of Walker’s Church and will push forward to the front for the purpose of meeting you. Notice sent to me on this road where you wish the interview to take place will meet me.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
					<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I was conducted at once to where Sheridan was located with his troops drawn up in line of battle facing the Confederate army near by. They were very much excited, and expressed their view that this was all a ruse employed to enable the Confederates to get away. They said they believed that Johnston was marching up from North Carolina now, and Lee was moving to join him; and they would whip the rebels where they now were in five minutes if I would only let them go in. But I had no doubt about the good faith of Lee, and pretty soon was conducted to where he was. I found him at the house of a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> McLean, at Appomattox Court House, with Colonel Marshall, one of his staff officers, awaiting my arrival. The head of his column was occupying a hill, on a portion of which was an apple orchard, beyond a little valley which separated it from that on the crest of which Sheridan’s forces were drawn up in line of battle to the south.</p>
			<p>Before stating what took place between General Lee and myself, I will give all there is of the story of the famous apple tree.</p>
			<p>Wars produce many stories of fiction, some of which are told until they are believed to be true. The war of the rebellion was no exception to this rule, and the story of the apple tree is one of those fictions based on a slight foundation of fact. As I have said, there was an apple orchard on the side of the hill occupied by the Confederate forces. Running diagonally up the hill was a wagon road, which, at one point, ran very near one of the trees, so that the wheels of vehicles had, on that side, cut off the roots of this tree, leaving a little embankment. General Babcock, of my staff, reported to me that when he first met General Lee he was sitting upon this embankment with his feet in the road below and his back resting against the tree. The story had no other foundation than that. Like many other stories, it would be very good if it was only true.</p>
			<p>I had known General Lee in the old army, and had served with him in the Mexican War; but did not suppose, owing to the difference in our age and rank, that he would remember me, while I would more naturally remember him distinctly, because he was the chief of staff of General Scott in the Mexican War.</p>
			<p>When I had left camp that morning I had not expected so soon the result that was then taking place, and consequently was in rough garb. I was without a sword, as I usually was when on horseback on the field, and wore a soldier’s blouse for a coat, with the shoulder straps of my rank to indicate to the army who I was. When I went into the house I found General Lee. We greeted each other, and after shaking hands took our seats. I had my staff with me, a good portion of whom were in the room during the whole of the interview.</p>
			<p>What General Lee’s feelings were I do not know. As he was a man of much dignity, with an impassible face, it was impossible to say whether he felt inwardly glad that the end had finally come, or felt sad over the result, and was too manly to show it. Whatever his feelings, they were entirely concealed from my observation; but my own feelings, which had been quite jubilant on the receipt of his letter, were sad and depressed. I felt like anything rather than rejoicing at the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly, and had suffered so much for a cause, though that cause was, I believe, one of the worst for which a people ever fought, and one for which there was the least excuse. I do not question, however, the sincerity of the great mass of those who were opposed to us.</p>
			<p>General Lee was dressed in a full uniform which was entirely new, and was wearing a sword of considerable value, very likely the sword which had been presented by the State of Virginia; at all events, it was an entirely different sword from the one that would ordinarily be worn in the field. In my rough traveling suit, the uniform of a private with the straps of a lieutenant-general, I must have contrasted very strangely with a man so handsomely dressed, six feet high and of faultless form. But this was not a matter that I thought of until afterwards.</p>
			<p>We soon fell into a conversation about old army times. He remarked that he remembered me very well in the old army; and I told him that as a matter of course I remembered him perfectly, but from the difference in our rank and years (there being about sixteen years’ difference in our ages), I had thought it very likely that I had not attracted his attention sufficiently to be remembered by him after such a long interval. Our conversation grew so pleasant that I almost forgot the object of our meeting. After the conversation had run on in this style for some time, General Lee called my attention to the object of our meeting, and said that he had asked for this interview for the purpose of getting from me the terms I proposed to give his army. I said that I meant merely that his army should lay down their arms, not to take them up again during the continuance of the war unless duly and properly exchanged. He said that he had so understood my letter.</p>
			<p>Then we gradually fell off again into conversation about matters foreign to the subject which had brought us together. This continued for some little time, when General Lee again interrupted the course of the conversation by suggesting that the terms I proposed to give his army ought to be written out. I called to General Parker, secretary on my staff, for writing materials, and commenced writing out the following terms:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p class="letter-location">Appomattox <abbr class="initialism">C. H.</abbr>, VA.,</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Ap 19th, 1865.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Gen. <abbr class="name">R. E.</abbr> Lee,</p>
					<p>Comd’g <abbr>C. S. A.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Gen</span>: In accordance with the substance of my letter to you of the 8th inst., I propose to receive the surrender of the Army of N. Va. on the following terms, to wit: Rolls of all the officers and men to be made in duplicate. One copy to be given to an officer designated by me, the other to be retained by such officer or officers as you may designate. The officers to give their individual paroles not to take up arms against the Government of the United States until properly exchanged, and each company or regimental commander sign a like parole for the men of their commands. The arms, artillery and public property to be parked and stacked, and turned over to the officer appointed by me to receive them. This will not embrace the side-arms of the officers, nor their private horses or baggage. This done, each officer and man will be allowed to return to their homes, not to be disturbed by United States authority so long as they observe their paroles and the laws in force where they may reside.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Very respectfully,</p>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
					<p><abbr>Lt.</abbr> Gen.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When I put my pen to the paper I did not know the first word that I should make use of in writing the terms. I only knew what was in my mind, and I wished to express it clearly, so that there could be no mistaking it. As I wrote on, the thought occurred to me that the officers had their own private horses and effects, which were important to them, but of no value to us; also that it would be an unnecessary humiliation to call upon them to deliver their side arms.</p>
			<p>No conversation, not one word, passed between General Lee and myself, either about private property, side arms, or kindred subjects. He appeared to have no objections to the terms first proposed; or if he had a point to make against them he wished to wait until they were in writing to make it. When he read over that part of the terms about side arms, horses and private property of the officers, he remarked, with some feeling, I thought, that this would have a happy effect upon his army.</p>
			<p>Then, after a little further conversation, General Lee remarked to me again that their army was organized a little differently from the army of the United States (still maintaining by implication that we were two countries); that in their army the cavalrymen and artillerists owned their own horses; and he asked if he was to understand that the men who so owned their horses were to be permitted to retain them. I told him that as the terms were written they would not; that only the officers were permitted to take their private property. He then, after reading over the terms a second time, remarked that that was clear.</p>
			<p>I then said to him that I thought this would be about the last battle of the war⁠—I sincerely hoped so; and I said further I took it that most of the men in the ranks were small farmers. The whole country had been so raided by the two armies that it was doubtful whether they would be able to put in a crop to carry themselves and their families through the next winter without the aid of the horses they were then riding. The United States did not want them and I would, therefore, instruct the officers I left behind to receive the paroles of his troops to let every man of the Confederate army who claimed to own a horse or mule take the animal to his home. Lee remarked again that this would have a happy effect.</p>
			<p>He then sat down and wrote out the following letter:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Army of Northern Virginia,</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9, 1865.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">General</span>:⁠—I received your letter of this date containing the terms of the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia as proposed by you. As they are substantially the same as those expressed in your letter of the 8th inst., they are accepted. I will proceed to designate the proper officers to carry the stipulations into effect.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">R. E.</abbr> Lee, General.</p>
				</footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General <abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>While duplicates of the two letters were being made, the Union generals present were severally presented to General Lee.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>[<b>Note</b>.⁠—The facsimile of the terms of Lee’s surrender inserted at this place, was copied from the original document furnished the publishers through the courtesy of General Ely S. Parker, Military Secretary on General Grant’s staff at the time of the surrender.</p>
				<p>Three pages of paper were prepared in General Grant’s manifold order book on which he wrote the terms, and the interlineations and erasures were added by General Parker at the suggestion of General Grant. After such alteration it was handed to General Lee, who put on his glasses, read it, and handed it back to General Grant. The original was then transcribed by General Parker upon official headed paper and a copy furnished General Lee.</p>
				<p>The facsimile herewith shows the color of the paper of the original document and all interlineations and erasures.</p>
				<p>There is a popular error to the effect that Generals Grant and Lee each signed the articles of surrender. The document in the form of a letter was signed only by General Grant, in the parlor of McLean’s house while General Lee was sitting in the room, and General Lee immediately wrote a letter accepting the terms and handed it to General Grant.]</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The much talked of surrendering of Lee’s sword and my handing it back, this and much more that has been said about it is the purest romance. The word sword or side arms was not mentioned by either of us until I wrote it in the terms. There was no premeditation, and it did not occur to me until the moment I wrote it down. If I had happened to omit it, and General Lee had called my attention to it, I should have put it in the terms precisely as I acceded to the provision about the soldiers retaining their horses.</p>
			<p>General Lee, after all was completed and before taking his leave, remarked that his army was in a very bad condition for want of food, and that they were without forage; that his men had been living for some days on parched corn exclusively, and that he would have to ask me for rations and forage. I told him “certainly,” and asked for how many men he wanted rations. His answer was “about twenty-five thousand;” and I authorized him to send his own commissary and quartermaster to Appomattox Station, two or three miles away, where he could have, out of the trains we had stopped, all the provisions wanted. As for forage, we had ourselves depended almost entirely upon the country for that.</p>
			<p>Generals Gibbon, Griffin and Merritt were designated by me to carry into effect the paroling of Lee’s troops before they should start for their homes⁠—General Lee leaving Generals Longstreet, Gordon and Pendleton for them to confer with in order to facilitate this work. Lee and I then separated as cordially as we had met, he returning to his own lines, and all went into bivouac for the night at Appomattox.</p>
			<p>Soon after Lee’s departure I telegraphed to Washington as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Appomattox <abbr class="initialism">C. H.</abbr>, VA.,</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9th, 1865, 4.30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
					<p><abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr class="name">E. M.</abbr> Stanton, Secretary of War,</p>
					<p>Washington.</p>
				</header>
				<p>General Lee surrendered the Army of Northern Virginia this afternoon on terms proposed by myself. The accompanying additional correspondence will show the conditions fully.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When news of the surrender first reached our lines our men commenced firing a salute of a hundred guns in honor of the victory. I at once sent word, however, to have it stopped. The Confederates were now our prisoners, and we did not want to exult over their downfall.</p>
			<p>I determined to return to Washington at once, with a view to putting a stop to the purchase of supplies, and what I now deemed other useless outlay of money. Before leaving, however, I thought I would like to see General Lee again; so next morning I rode out beyond our lines towards his headquarters, preceded by a bugler and a staff-officer carrying a white flag.</p>
			<p>Lee soon mounted his horse, seeing who it was, and met me. We had there between the lines, sitting on horseback, a very pleasant conversation of over half an hour, in the course of which Lee said to me that the South was a big country and that we might have to march over it three or four times before the war entirely ended, but that we would now be able to do it as they could no longer resist us. He expressed it as his earnest hope, however, that we would not be called upon to cause more loss and sacrifice of life; but he could not foretell the result. I then suggested to General Lee that there was not a man in the Confederacy whose influence with the soldiery and the whole people was as great as his, and that if he would now advise the surrender of all the armies I had no doubt his advice would be followed with alacrity. But Lee said, that he could not do that without consulting the President first. I knew there was no use to urge him to do anything against his ideas of what was right.</p>
			<p>I was accompanied by my staff and other officers, some of whom seemed to have a great desire to go inside the Confederate lines. They finally asked permission of Lee to do so for the purpose of seeing some of their old army friends, and the permission was granted. They went over, had a very pleasant time with their old friends, and brought some of them back with them when they returned.</p>
			<p>When Lee and I separated he went back to his lines and I returned to the house of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> McLean. Here the officers of both armies came in great numbers, and seemed to enjoy the meeting as much as though they had been friends separated for a long time while fighting battles under the same flag. For the time being it looked very much as if all thought of the war had escaped their minds. After an hour pleasantly passed in this way I set out on horseback, accompanied by my staff and a small escort, for Burkesville Junction, up to which point the railroad had by this time been repaired.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
