<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards General Gardner, <abbr class="initialism eoc">C.S.A.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>General Garland expressed a wish to get a message back to General Twiggs, his division commander, or General Taylor, to the effect that he was nearly out of ammunition and must have more sent to him, or otherwise be reinforced. Deeming the return dangerous he did not like to order anyone to carry it, so he called for a volunteer. Lieutenant Grant offered his services, which were accepted. <cite>—Publishers.</cite> <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mentioned in the reports of Major Lee, Colonel Garland and General Worth. <cite>—Publishers.</cite> <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—It had been a favorite idea with General Scott for a great many years before the Mexican war to have established in the United States a soldiers’ home, patterned after something of the kind abroad, particularly, I believe, in France. He recommended this uniformly, or at least frequently, in his annual reports to the Secretary of War, but never got any hearing. Now, as he had conquered the state, he made assessments upon the different large towns and cities occupied by our troops, in proportion to their capacity to pay, and appointed officers to receive the money. In addition to the sum thus realized he had derived, through capture at Cerro Gordo, sales of captured government tobacco, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, sums which swelled the fund to a total of about $220,000. Portions of this fund were distributed among the rank and file, given to the wounded in hospital, or applied in other ways, leaving a balance of some $118,000 remaining unapplied at the close of the war. After the war was over and the troops all home, General Scott applied to have this money, which had never been turned into the Treasury of the United States, expended in establishing such homes as he had previously recommended. This fund was the foundation of the Soldiers’ Home at Washington City, and also one at Harrodsburgh, Kentucky.</p>
					<p>The latter went into disuse many years ago. In fact it never had many soldiers in it, and was, I believe, finally sold. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Mexican war made three presidential candidates, Scott, Taylor and Pierce⁠—and any number of aspirants for that high office. It made also governors of States, members of the cabinet, foreign ministers and other officers of high rank both in state and nation. The rebellion, which contained more war in a single day, at some critical periods, than the whole Mexican war in two years, has not been so fruitful of political results to those engaged on the Union side. On the other side, the side of the South, nearly every man who holds office of any sort whatever, either in the state or in the nation, was a Confederate soldier, but this is easily accounted for from the fact that the South was a military camp, and there were very few people of a suitable age to be in the army who were not in it. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">C. B.</abbr> Lagow, the others not yet having joined me. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—Since writing this chapter I have received from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. H. L.</abbr> Wallace, widow of the gallant general who was killed in the first day’s fight on the field of Shiloh, a letter from General Lew. Wallace to him dated the morning of the 5th. At the date of this letter it was well known that the Confederates had troops out along the Mobile &amp; Ohio railroad west of Crump’s landing and Pittsburg landing, and were also collecting near Shiloh. This letter shows that at that time General Lew. Wallace was making preparations for the emergency that might happen for the passing of reinforcements between Shiloh and his position, extending from Crump’s landing westward, and he sends it over the road running from Adamsville to the Pittsburg landing and Purdy road. These two roads intersect nearly a mile west of the crossing of the latter over Owl Creek, where our right rested. In this letter General Lew. Wallace advises General <abbr class="name">W. H. L.</abbr> Wallace that he will send “tomorrow” (and his letter also says “April 5th,” which is the same day the letter was dated and which, therefore, must have been written on the 4th) some cavalry to report to him at his headquarters, and suggesting the propriety of General <abbr class="name">W. H. L.</abbr> Wallace’s sending a company back with them for the purpose of having the cavalry at the two landings familiarize themselves with the road so that they could “act promptly in case of emergency as guides to and from the different camps.”</p>
					<p>This modifies very materially what I have said, and what has been said by others, of the conduct of General Lew. Wallace at the battle of Shiloh. It shows that he naturally, with no more experience than he had at the time in the profession of arms, would take the particular road that he did start upon in the absence of orders to move by a different road.</p>
					<p>The mistake he made, and which probably caused his apparent dilatoriness, was that of advancing some distance after he found that the firing, which would be at first directly to his front and then off to the left, had fallen back until it had got very much in rear of the position of his advance. This falling back had taken place before I sent General Wallace orders to move up to Pittsburg landing and, naturally, my order was to follow the road nearest the river. But my order was verbal, and to a staff officer who was to deliver it to General Wallace, so that I am not competent to say just what order the General actually received.</p>
					<p>General Wallace’s division was stationed, the First brigade at Crump’s landing, the Second out two miles, and the Third two and a half miles out. Hearing the sounds of battle General Wallace early ordered his First and Third brigades to concentrate on the Second. If the position of our front had not changed, the road which Wallace took would have been somewhat shorter to our right than the River road.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant.</p>
					<p>Mount Macgregor, New York,</p>
					<p>June 21, 1885. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>: In an article on the battle of Shiloh which I wrote for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Century Magazine</i>, I stated that General <abbr class="name">A. McD.</abbr> McCook, who commanded a division of Buell’s army, expressed some unwillingness to pursue the enemy on Monday, April 7th, because of the condition of his troops. General Badeau, in his history, also makes the same statement, on my authority. Out of justice to General McCook and his command, I must say that they left a point twenty-two miles east of Savannah on the morning of the 6th. From the heavy rains of a few days previous and the passage of trains and artillery, the roads were necessarily deep in mud, which made marching slow. The division had not only marched through this mud the day before, but it had been in the rain all night without rest. It was engaged in the battle of the second day and did as good service as its position allowed. In fact an opportunity occurred for it to perform a conspicuous act of gallantry which elicited the highest commendation from division commanders in the Army of the Tennessee. General Sherman both in his memoirs and report makes mention of this fact. General McCook himself belongs to a family which furnished many volunteers to the army. I refer to these circumstances with minuteness because I did General McCook injustice in my article in the Century, though not to the extent one would suppose from the public press. I am not willing to do anyone an injustice, and if convinced that I have done one, I am always willing to make the fullest admission. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—For gallantry in the various engagements, from the time I was left in command down to 26th of October and on my recommendation, Generals McPherson and <abbr class="name">C. S.</abbr> Hamilton were promoted to be Major-Generals, and Colonels <abbr class="name">C. C.</abbr> Marsh, 20th Illinois, <abbr class="name">M. M.</abbr> Crocker, 13th Iowa <abbr class="name">J. A.</abbr> Mower, 11th Missouri, <abbr class="name">M. D.</abbr> Leggett, 78th Ohio, <abbr class="name">J. D.</abbr> Stevenson, 7th Missouri, and John <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Smith, 45th Illinois, to be Brigadiers. <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Colonel Ellet reported having attacked a Confederate battery on the Red River two days before with one of his boats, the De Soto. Running aground, he was obliged to abandon his vessel. However, he reported that he set fire to her and blew her up. Twenty of his men fell into the hands of the enemy. With the balance he escaped on the small captured steamer, the New Era, and succeeded in passing the batteries at Grand Gulf and reaching the vicinity of Vicksburg. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of Colonel Ellet’s vessels which had run the blockade on February the 2nd and been sunk in the Red River. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—On this occasion Governor Richard Yates, of Illinois, happened to be on a visit to the army and accompanied me to Carthage. I furnished an ambulance for his use and that of some of the State officers who accompanied him. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—When General Sherman first learned of the move I proposed to make, he called to see me about it. I recollect that I had transferred my headquarters from a boat in the river to a house a short distance back from the levee. I was seated on the piazza engaged in conversation with my staff when Sherman came up. After a few moments’ conversation he said that he would like to see me alone. We passed into the house together and shut the door after us. Sherman then expressed his alarm at the move I had ordered, saying that I was putting myself in a position voluntarily which an enemy would be glad to manoeuvre a year⁠—or a long time⁠—to get me in. I was going into the enemy’s country, with a large river behind me and the enemy holding points strongly fortified above and below. He said that it was an axiom in war that when any great body of troops moved against an enemy they should do so from a base of supplies, which they would guard as they would the apple of the eye, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He pointed out all the difficulties that might be encountered in the campaign proposed, and stated in turn what would be the true campaign to make. This was, in substance, to go back until high ground could be reached on the east bank of the river; fortify there and establish a depot of supplies, and move from there, being always prepared to fall back upon it in case of disaster. I said this would take us back to Memphis. Sherman then said that was the very place he would go to, and would move by railroad from Memphis to Grenada, repairing the road as we advanced. To this I replied, the country is already disheartened over the lack of success on the part of our armies; the last election went against the vigorous prosecution of the war, voluntary enlistments had ceased throughout most of the North and conscription was already resorted to, and if we went back so far as Memphis it would discourage the people so much that bases of supplies would be of no use: neither men to hold them nor supplies to put in them would be furnished. The problem for us was to move forward to a decisive victory, or our cause was lost. No progress was being made in any other field, and we had to go on.</p>
					<p>Sherman wrote to my adjutant general, Colonel <abbr class="name">J. A.</abbr> Rawlins, embodying his views of the campaign that should be made, and asking him to advise me to at least get the views of my generals upon the subject. Colonel Rawlins showed me the letter, but I did not see any reason for changing my plans. The letter was not answered and the subject was not subsequently mentioned between Sherman and myself to the end of the war, that I remember of. I did not regard the letter as official, and consequently did not preserve it. General Sherman furnished a copy himself to General Badeau, who printed it in his history of my campaigns. I did not regard either the conversation between us or the letter to my adjutant-general as protests, but simply friendly advice which the relations between us fully justified. Sherman gave the same energy to make the campaign a success that he would or could have done if it had been ordered by himself. I make this statement here to correct an impression which was circulated at the close of the war to Sherman’s prejudice, and for which there was no fair foundation. <a href="chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meant Edward’s Station. <a href="chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Chattanooga,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">November 18, 1863.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General <abbr class="name">W. T.</abbr> Sherman</p>
						</header>
						<p>Enclosed herewith I send you copy of instructions to Major-General Thomas. You having been over the ground in person, and having heard the whole matter discussed, further instructions will not be necessary for you. It is particularly desirable that a force should be got through to the railroad between Cleveland and Dalton, and Longstreet thus cut off from communication with the South, but being confronted by a large force here, strongly located, it is not easy to tell how this is to be effected until the result of our first effort is known.</p>
						<p>I will add, however, what is not shown in my instructions to Thomas, that a brigade of cavalry has been ordered here which, if it arrives in time, will be thrown across the Tennessee above Chickamauga, and may be able to make the trip to Cleveland or thereabouts.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant</p>
							<p>Maj.-Gen’l.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Chattanooga,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">November 18, 1863.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General <abbr class="name">Geo. H.</abbr> Thomas,</p>
							<p>Chattanooga:</p>
						</header>
						<p>All preparations should be made for attacking the enemy’s position on Missionary Ridge by Saturday at daylight. Not being provided with a map giving names of roads, spurs of the mountains, and other places, such definite instructions cannot be given as might be desirable. However, the general plan, you understand, is for Sherman, with the force brought with him strengthened by a division from your command, to effect a crossing of the Tennessee River just below the mouth of Chickamauga; his crossing to be protected by artillery from the heights on the north bank of the river (to be located by your chief of artillery), and to secure the heights on the northern extremity to about the railroad tunnel before the enemy can concentrate against him. You will cooperate with Sherman. The troops in Chattanooga Valley should be well concentrated on your left flank, leaving only the necessary force to defend fortifications on the right and center, and a movable column of one division in readiness to move wherever ordered. This division should show itself as threateningly as possible on the most practicable line for making an attack up the valley. Your effort then will be to form a junction with Sherman, making your advance well towards the northern end of Missionary Ridge, and moving as near simultaneously with him as possible. The junction once formed and the ridge carried, communications will be at once established between the two armies by roads on the south bank of the river. Further movements will then depend on those of the enemy. Lookout Valley, I think, will be easily held by Geary’s division and what troops you may still have there belonging to the old Army of the Cumberland. Howard’s corps can then be held in readiness to act either with you at Chattanooga or with Sherman. It should be marched on Friday night to a position on the north side of the river, not lower down than the first pontoon-bridge, and there held in readiness for such orders as may become necessary. All these troops will be provided with two days’ cooked rations in haversacks, and one hundred rounds of ammunition on the person of each infantry soldier. Special care should be taken by all officers to see that ammunition is not wasted or unnecessarily fired away. You will call on the engineer department for such preparations as you may deem necessary for carrying your infantry and artillery over the creek.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Major-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this order authority was given for the troops to reform after taking the first line of rifle-pits preparatory to carrying the ridge. <a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Chattanooga,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">November 24,1863.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General <abbr class="name">Geo. H.</abbr> Thomas,</p>
						</header>
						<p>Chattanooga</p>
						<p>General Sherman carried Missionary Ridge as far as the tunnel with only slight skirmishing. His right now rests at the tunnel and on top of the hill, his left at Chickamauga Creek. I have instructed General Sherman to advance as soon as it is light in the morning, and your attack, which will be simultaneous, will be in cooperation. Your command will either carry the rifle-pits and ridge directly in front of them, or move to the left, as the presence of the enemy may require. If Hooker’s position on the mountain [cannot be maintained] with a small force, and it is found impracticable to carry the top from where he is, it would be advisable for him to move up the valley with all the force he can spare, and ascend by the first practicable road.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Major-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Note</b>.⁠—From this point on this volume was written (with the exception of the campaign in the Wilderness, which had been previously written) by General Grant, after his great illness in April, and the present arrangement of the subject-matter was made by him between the 10th and 18th of July, 1885. <a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 8, 1863, 10:2 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Maj.-General <abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant:</p>
						</header>
						<p>Understanding that your lodgment at Knoxville and at Chattanooga is now secure, I wish to tender you, and all under your command, my more than thanks, my profoundest gratitude for the skill, courage, and perseverance with which you and they, over so great difficulties, have effected that important object. God bless you all,</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">A. Lincoln,</p>
							<p>President <abbr class="initialism eoc">U.S.</abbr></p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>General John <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Foster <a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>During this winter the citizens of Jo Daviess County, Ill., subscribed for and had a diamond-hilted sword made for General Grant, which was always known as the Chattanooga sword. The scabbard was of gold, and was ornamented with a scroll running nearly its entire length, displaying in engraved letters the names of the battles in which General Grant had participated.</p>
					<p>Congress also gave him a vote of thanks for the victories at Chattanooga, and voted him a gold medal for Vicksburg and Chattanooga. All such things are now in the possession of the government at Washington. <a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 29, 1863.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Maj.-General <abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant:</p>
						</header>
						<p>General Foster has asked to be relieved from his command on account of disability from old wounds. Should his request be granted, who would you like as his successor? It is possible that Schofield will be sent to your command.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">H. W.</abbr> Halleck</p>
							<p>General-in-Chief.</p>
							<p>(Official.)</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See letter to Banks, in General Grant’s report, Appendix. <a href="chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p><b>[Private and Confidential]</b>.</p>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Armies of the United States, Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 4, 1864.</p>
							<p>Major-General <abbr class="name">W. T.</abbr> Sherman,</p>
							<p>Commanding Military Division of the Mississippi.</p>
						</header>
						<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">General</span>:⁠—It is my design, if the enemy keep quiet and allow me to take the initiative in the spring campaign, to work all parts of the army together, and somewhat towards a common center. For your information I now write you my programme, as at present determined upon.</p>
						<p>I have sent orders to Banks, by private messenger, to finish up his present expedition against Shreveport with all dispatch; to turn over the defence of Red River to General Steele and the navy and to return your troops to you and his own to New Orleans; to abandon all of Texas, except the Rio Grande, and to hold that with not to exceed four thousand men; to reduce the number of troops on the Mississippi to the lowest number necessary to hold it, and to collect from his command not less than twenty-five thousand men. To this I will add five thousand men from Missouri. With this force he is to commence operations against Mobile as soon as he can. It will be impossible for him to commence too early.</p>
						<p>Gillmore joins Butler with ten thousand men, and the two operate against Richmond from the south side of the James River. This will give Butler thirty-three thousand men to operate with, <abbr class="name">W. F.</abbr> Smith commanding the right wing of his forces and Gillmore the left wing. I will stay with the Army of the Potomac, increased by Burnside’s corps of not less than twenty-five thousand effective men, and operate directly against Lee’s army, wherever it may be found.</p>
						<p>Sigel collects all his available force in two columns, one, under Ord and Averell, to start from Beverly, Virginia, and the other, under Crook, to start from Charleston on the Kanawha, to move against the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad.</p>
						<p>Crook will have all cavalry, and will endeavor to get in about Saltville, and move east from there to join Ord. His force will be all cavalry, while Ord will have from ten to twelve thousand men of all arms.</p>
						<p>You I propose to move against Johnston’s army, to break it up and to get into the interior of the enemy’s country as far as you can, inflicting all the damage you can against their war resources.</p>
						<p>I do not propose to lay down for you a plan of campaign, but simply lay down the work it is desirable to have done and leave you free to execute it in your own way. Submit to me, however, as early as you can, your plan of operations.</p>
						<p>As stated, Banks is ordered to commence operations as soon as he can. Gillmore is ordered to report at Fortress Monroe by the 18th inst., or as soon thereafter as practicable. Sigel is concentrating now. None will move from their places of rendezvous until I direct, except Banks. I want to be ready to move by the 25th inst., if possible. But all I can now direct is that you get ready as soon as possible. I know you will have difficulties to encounter in getting through the mountains to where supplies are abundant, but I believe you will accomplish it.</p>
						<p>From the expedition from the Department of West Virginia I do not calculate on very great results; but it is the only way I can take troops from there. With the long line of railroad Sigel has to protect, he can spare no troops except to move directly to his front. In this way he must get through to inflict great damage on the enemy, or the enemy must detach from one of his armies a large force to prevent it. In other words, if Sigel can’t skin himself he can hold a leg while someone else skins.</p>
						<footer>
							<p>I am, general, very respectfully,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your obedient servant,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See instructions to Butler, in General Grant’s report, Appendix. <a href="chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">In Field, Culpeper <abbr class="initialism">C.H.</abbr>, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">April 9, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Maj. General</abbr> <abbr class="name">Geo. G.</abbr> Meade</p>
							<p><abbr>Com’d’g</abbr> Army of the Potomac.</p>
						</header>
						<p>For information and as instruction to govern your preparations for the coming campaign, the following is communicated confidentially for your own perusal alone.</p>
						<p>So far as practicable all the armies are to move together, and towards one common center. Banks has been instructed to turn over the guarding of the Red River to General Steele and the navy, to abandon Texas with the exception of the Rio Grande, and to concentrate all the force he can, not less than 25,000 men, to move on Mobile. This he is to do without reference to other movements. From the scattered condition of his command, however, he cannot possibly get it together to leave New Orleans before the 1st of May, if so soon. Sherman will move at the same time you do, or two or three days in advance, Jo. Johnston’s army being his objective point, and the heart of Georgia his ultimate aim. If successful he will secure the line from Chattanooga to Mobile with the aid of Banks.</p>
						<p>Sigel cannot spare troops from his army to reinforce either of the great armies, but he can aid them by moving directly to his front. This he has been directed to do, and is now making preparations for it. Two columns of his command will make south at the same time with the general move; one from Beverly, from ten to twelve thousand strong, under Major-General Ord; the other from Charleston, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>, principally cavalry, under Brig.-General Crook. The former of these will endeavor to reach the Tennessee and Virginia Railroad, about south of Covington, and if found practicable will work eastward to Lynchburg and return to its base by way of the Shenandoah Valley, or join you. The other will strike at Saltville, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>, and come eastward to join Ord. The cavalry from Ord’s command will try to force a passage southward, if they are successful in reaching the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad, to cut the main lines of the road connecting Richmond with all the South and Southwest.</p>
						<p>Gillmore will join Butler with about 10,000 men from South Carolina. Butler can reduce his garrison so as to take 23,000 men into the field directly to his front. The force will be commanded by Maj.-General <abbr class="name">W. F.</abbr> Smith. With Smith and Gillmore, Butler will seize City Point, and operate against Richmond from the south side of the river. His movement will be simultaneous with yours.</p>
						<p>Lee’s army will be your objective point. Wherever Lee goes, there you will go also. The only point upon which I am now in doubt is, whether it will be better to cross the Rapidan above or below him. Each plan presents great advantages over the other with corresponding objections. By crossing above, Lee is cut off from all chance of ignoring Richmond and going north on a raid. But if we take this route, all we do must be done whilst the rations we start with hold out. We separate from Butler so that he cannot be directed how to cooperate. By the other route Brandy Station can be used as a base of supplies until another is secured on the York or James rivers.</p>
						<p>These advantages and objections I will talk over with you more fully than I can write them.</p>
						<p>Burnside with a force of probably 25,000 men will reinforce you. Immediately upon his arrival, which will be shortly after the 20th inst., I will give him the defence of the road from Bull Run as far south as we wish to hold it. This will enable you to collect all your strength about Brandy Station and to the front.</p>
						<p>There will be naval cooperation on the James River, and transports and ferries will be provided so that should Lee fall back into his intrenchments at Richmond, Butler’s force and yours will be a unit, or at least can be made to act as such. What I would direct then, is that you commence at once reducing baggage to the very lowest possible standard. Two wagons to a regiment of five hundred men is the greatest number that should be allowed, for all baggage, exclusive of subsistence stores and ordnance stores. One wagon to brigade and one to division headquarters is sufficient and about two to corps headquarters.</p>
						<p>Should by Lee’s right flank be our route, you will want to make arrangements for having supplies of all sorts promptly forwarded to White House on the Pamunkey. Your estimates for this contingency should be made at once. If not wanted there, there is every probability they will be wanted on the James River or elsewhere.</p>
						<p>If Lee’s left is turned, large provision will have to be made for ordnance stores. I would say not much short of five hundred rounds of infantry ammunition would do. By the other, half the amount would be sufficient.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>General John <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Logan, upon whom devolved the command of the Army of the Tennessee during this battle, in his report gave our total loss in killed, wounded and missing at 3,521; and estimated that of the enemy to be not less than 10,000: and General <abbr class="name">G. M.</abbr> Dodge, graphically describing to General Sherman the enemy’s attack, the full weight of which fell first upon and was broken by his depleted command, remarks: “The disparity of forces can be seen from the fact that in the charge made by my two brigades under Fuller and Mersy they took 351 prisoners, representing forty-nine different regiments, eight brigades and three divisions; and brought back eight battle flags from the enemy.” <a href="chapter-49.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At this point organizational charts for both armies appear as a footnote, which we have moved to an <a href="appendix.xhtml#organization">appendix</a>. <cite>—<abbr class="initialism">S.E.</abbr> Editor.</cite> <a href="chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Armies <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">May 11, 1864.⁠—3 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Meade,</p>
							<p>Commanding Army of the Potomac.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Move three divisions of the 2nd corps by the rear of the 5th and 6th corps, under cover of night, so as to join the 9th corps in a vigorous assault on the enemy at four o’clock <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> tomorrow. I will send one or two staff officers over tonight to stay with Burnside, and impress him with the importance of a prompt and vigorous attack. Warren and Wright should hold their corps as close to the enemy as possible, to take advantage of any diversion caused by this attack, and to push in if any opportunity presents itself. There is but little doubt in my mind that the assault last evening would have proved entirely successful if it had commenced one hour earlier and had been heartily entered into by Mott’s division and the 9th corps.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Headquarters, Armies <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">May 11, 1864.-4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General <abbr class="name">A. E.</abbr> Burnside,</p>
							<p>Commanding 9th Army Corps.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Major-General Hancock has been ordered to move his corps under cover of night to join you in a vigorous attack against the enemy at 4 o’clock <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> tomorrow. You will move against the enemy with your entire force promptly and with all possible vigor at precisely 4 o’clock <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> tomorrow the 12th inst. Let your preparations for this attack be conducted with the utmost secrecy and veiled entirely from the enemy.</p>
						<p>I send two of my staff officers, Colonels Comstock and Babcock, in whom I have great confidence and who are acquainted with the direction the attack is to be made from here, to remain with you and General Hancock with instructions to render you every assistance in their power. Generals Warren and Wright will hold their corps as close to the enemy as possible, to take advantage of any diversion caused by yours and Hancock’s attack, and will push in their whole force if any opportunity presents itself.</p>
						<footer>
							<p><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-53.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p class="letter-location">Headquarters Armies <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>,</p>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">May 12, 1864, 6:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Halleck,</p>
						<p>Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
						<p>The eighth day of the battle closes, leaving between three and four thousand prisoners in our hands for the day’s work, including two general officers, and over thirty pieces of artillery. The enemy are obstinate, and seem to have found the last ditch. We have lost no organizations, not even that of a company, whilst we have destroyed and captured one division (Johnson’s), one brigade (Doles’), and one regiment entire from the enemy.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-53.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Spottsylvania <abbr class="initialism">C.H.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">May 13, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Hon <abbr class="name">E. M.</abbr> Stanton, Secretary of War,</p>
							<p>Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>I beg leave to recommend the following promotions be made for gallant and distinguished services in the last eight days’ battles, to wit: Brigadier-General <abbr class="name">H. G.</abbr> Wright and Brigadier-General John Gibbon to be Major-Generals; Colonel <abbr class="name">S. S.</abbr> Carroll, 8th Ohio Volunteers Colonel <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Upton, 121st New York Volunteers; Colonel William McCandless, 2nd Pennsylvania Reserves, to be Brigadier-Generals. I would also recommend Major-General <abbr class="name">W. S.</abbr> Hancock for Brigadier-General in the regular army. His services and qualifications are eminently deserving of this recognition. In making these recommendations I do not wish the claims of General <abbr class="name">G. M.</abbr> Dodge for promotion forgotten, but recommend his name to be sent in at the same time. I would also ask to have General Wright assigned to the command of the Sixth Army Corps. I would further ask the confirmation of General Humphreys to the rank of Major-General.</p>
						<p>General Meade has more than met my most sanguine expectations. He and Sherman are the fittest officers for large commands I have come in contact with. If their services can be rewarded by promotion to the rank of Major-Generals in the regular army the honor would be worthily bestowed, and I would feel personally gratified. I would not like to see one of these promotions at this time without seeing both.</p>
						<footer>
							<p><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-53.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Quarles’ Mills, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">May 26, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Halleck,</p>
							<p>Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>The relative position of the two armies is now as follows: Lee’s right rests on a swamp east of the Richmond and Fredericksburg road and south of the North Anna, his center on the river at Ox Ford, and his left at Little River with the crossings of Little River guarded as far up as we have gone. Hancock with his corps and one division of the 9th corps crossed at Chesterfield Ford and covers the right wing of Lee’s army. One division of the 9th corps is on the north bank of the Anna at Ox Ford, with bridges above and below at points nearest to it where both banks are held by us, so that it could reinforce either wing of our army with equal facility. The 5th and 6th corps with one division of the 9th corps run from the south bank of the Anna from a short distance above Ox Ford to Little River, and parallel with and near to the enemy.</p>
						<p>To make a direct attack from either wing would cause a slaughter of our men that even success would not justify. To turn the enemy by his right, between the two Annas is impossible on account of the swamp upon which his right rests. To turn him by the left leaves Little River, New Found River and South Anna River, all of them streams presenting considerable obstacles to the movement of our army, to be crossed. I have determined therefore to turn the enemy’s right by crossing at or near Hanover Town. This crosses all three streams at once, and leaves us still where we can draw supplies.</p>
						<p>During the last night the teams and artillery not in position, belonging to the right wing of our army, and one division of that wing were quietly withdrawn to the north bank of the river and moved down to the rear of the left. As soon as it is dark this division with most of the cavalry will commence a forced march for Hanover Town to seize and hold the crossings. The balance of the right wing will withdraw at the same hour, and follow as rapidly as possible. The left wing will also withdraw from the south bank of the river tonight and follow in rear of the right wing. Lee’s army is really whipped. The prisoners we now take show it, and the action of his army shows it unmistakably. A battle with them outside of intrenchments cannot be had. Our men feel that they have gained the <em>morale</em> over the enemy, and attack him with confidence. I may be mistaken, but I feel that our success over Lee’s army is already assured. The promptness and rapidity with which you have forwarded reinforcements has contributed largely to the feeling of confidence inspired in our men, and to break down that of the enemy.</p>
						<p>We are destroying all the rails we can on the Central and Fredericksburg roads. I want to leave a gap on the roads north of Richmond so big that to get a single track they will have to import rail from elsewhere. Even if a crossing is not effected at Hanover Town it will probably be necessary for us to move on down the Pamunkey until a crossing is effected. I think it advisable therefore to change our base of supplies from Port Royal to the White House. I wish you would direct this change at once, and also direct Smith to put the railroad bridge there in condition for crossing troops and artillery and leave men to hold it.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Near Cold Harbor,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">June 3, 1864, 7 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Meade,</p>
							<p>Commanding <abbr class="initialism">A.P.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>The moment it becomes certain that an assault cannot succeed, suspend the offensive; but when one does succeed, push it vigorously and if necessary pile in troops at the successful point from wherever they can be taken. I shall go to where you are in the course of an hour.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Cold Harbor,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">June 5,1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Halleck,</p>
							<p>Chief of Staff of the Army, Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>A full survey of all the ground satisfies me that it would be impracticable to hold a line northeast of Richmond that would protect the Fredericksburg Railroad to enable us to use that road for supplying the army. To do so would give us a long vulnerable line of road to protect, exhausting much of our strength to guard it, and would leave open to the enemy all of his lines of communication on the south side of the James. My idea from the start has been to beat Lee’s army if possible north of Richmond; then after destroying his lines of communication on the north side of the James River to transfer the army to the south side and besiege Lee in Richmond, or follow him south if he should retreat.</p>
						<p>I now find, after over thirty days of trial, the enemy deems it of the first importance to run no risks with the armies they now have. They act purely on the defensive behind breastworks, or feebly on the offensive immediately in front of them, and where in case of repulse they can instantly retire behind them. Without a greater sacrifice of human life than I am willing to make all cannot be accomplished that I had designed outside of the city. I have therefore resolved upon the following plan:</p>
						<p>I will continue to hold substantially the ground now occupied by the Army of the Potomac, taking advantage of any favorable circumstance that may present itself until the cavalry can be sent west to destroy the Virginia Central Railroad from about Beaver Dam for some twenty-five or thirty miles west. When this is effected I will move the army to the south side of the James River, either by crossing the Chickahominy and marching near to City Point, or by going to the mouth of the Chickahominy on north side and crossing there. To provide for this last and most possible contingency, several ferryboats of the largest class ought to be immediately provided.</p>
						<p>Once on the south side of the James River, I can cut off all sources of supply to the enemy except what is furnished by the canal. If Hunter succeeds in reaching Lynchburg, that will be lost to him also. Should Hunter not succeed, I will still make the effort to destroy the canal by sending cavalry up the south side of the river with a pontoon train to cross wherever they can.</p>
						<p>The feeling of the two armies now seems to be that the rebels can protect themselves only by strong intrenchments, whilst our army is not only confident of protecting itself without intrenchments, but that it can beat and drive the enemy wherever and whenever he can be found without this protection.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Cold Harbor, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">June 6, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Hunter</p>
							<p>Commanding Dept. <abbr class="postal">W. Va.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>General Sheridan leaves here tomorrow morning, with instructions to proceed to Charlottesville, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>, and to commence there the destruction of the <abbr>Va. Cen. R. R.</abbr>, destroying this way as much as possible. The complete destruction of this road and of the canal on James River is of great importance to us. According to the instructions I sent to General Halleck for your guidance, you were to proceed to Lynchburg and commence there. It would be of great value to us to get possession of Lynchburg for a single day. But that point is of so much importance to the enemy, that in attempting to get it such resistance may be met as to defeat your getting onto the road or canal at all. I see, in looking over the letter to General Halleck on the subject of your instructions, that it rather indicates that your route should be from Staunton via Charlottesville. If you have so understood it, you will be doing just what I want. The direction I would now give is, that if this letter reaches you in the valley between Staunton and Lynchburg, you immediately turn east by the most practicable road. From thence move eastward along the line of the road, destroying it completely and thoroughly, until you join General Sheridan. After the work laid out for General Sheridan and yourself is thoroughly done, proceed to join the Army of the Potomac by the route laid out in General Sheridan’s instructions.</p>
						<p>If any portion of your force, especially your cavalry, is needed back in your Department, you are authorized to send it back.</p>
						<p>If on receipt of this you should be near to Lynchburg and deem it practicable to detach a cavalry force to destroy the canal. Lose no opportunity to destroy the canal.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From a Statement of Losses Compiled in the Adjutant-General’s Office</p>
					<table>
						<thead>
							<tr>
								<th>Field of Action and Date</th>
								<th>Killed</th>
								<th>Wounded</th>
								<th>Missing</th>
								<th>Aggregate</th>
							</tr>
						</thead>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>Wilderness, May 5th to 7th</td>
								<td>2,261</td>
								<td>8,785</td>
								<td>2,902</td>
								<td>13,948</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Spottsylvania, May 8th to 21st</td>
								<td>2,271</td>
								<td>9,360</td>
								<td>1,970</td>
								<td>13,601</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>North Anna, May 23d to 27th</td>
								<td>186</td>
								<td>792</td>
								<td>165</td>
								<td>1,143</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Totopotomoy, May 27th to 31st</td>
								<td>99</td>
								<td>358</td>
								<td>52</td>
								<td>509</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Cold Harbor, May 31st to June 12th</td>
								<td>1,769</td>
								<td>6,752</td>
								<td>1,537</td>
								<td>10,058</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>Total</td>
								<td>6,586</td>
								<td>26,047</td>
								<td>6,626</td>
								<td>39,259</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">June 17, 1864. 11 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> Major-Gen. Halleck, Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>The enemy in their endeavor to reinforce Petersburg abandoned their intrenchments in front of Bermuda Hundred. They no doubt expected troops from north of the James River to take their place before we discovered it. General Butler took advantage of this and moved a force at once upon the railroad and plank road between Richmond and Petersburg, which I hope to retain possession of. Too much credit cannot be given to the troops and their commanders for the energy and fortitude displayed during the last five days. Day and night has been all the same, no delays being allowed on any account.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">July 24, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Meade,</p>
							<p>Commanding, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
						</header>
						<p>The engineer officers who made a survey of the front from Bermuda Hundred report against the probability of success from an attack there. The chances they think will be better on Burnside’s front. If this is attempted it will be necessary to concentrate all the force possible at the point in the enemy’s line we expect to penetrate. All officers should be fully impressed with the absolute necessity of pushing entirely beyond the enemy’s present line, if they should succeed in penetrating it, and of getting back to their present line promptly if they should not succeed in breaking through.</p>
						<p>To the right and left of the point of assault all the artillery possible should be brought to play upon the enemy in front during the assault. Their lines would be sufficient for the support of the artillery, and all the reserves could be brought on the flanks of their commands nearest to the point of assault, ready to follow in if successful. The field artillery and infantry held in the lines during the first assault should be in readiness to move at a moment’s notice either to their front or to follow the main assault, as they should receive orders. One thing, however, should be impressed on corps commanders. If they see the enemy giving away on their front or moving from it to reinforce a heavily assaulted portion of their line, they should take advantage of such knowledge and act promptly without waiting for orders from army commanders. General Ord can cooperate with his corps in this movement, and about five thousand troops from Bermuda Hundred can be sent to reinforce you or can be used to threaten an assault between the Appomattox and James rivers, as may be deemed best.</p>
						<p>This should be done by Tuesday morning, if done at all. If not attempted, we will then start at the date indicated to destroy the railroad as far as Hicksford at least, and to Weldon if possible.</p>
						<p>[⁠ ⁠… ]</p>
						<p>Whether we send an expedition on the road or assault at Petersburg, Burnside’s mine will be blown up.⁠ ⁠…</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[See letter, August 5th, Appendix.] <a href="chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Appendix, letters of <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 11th. <a href="chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 2,1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>If Hood is permitted to remain quietly about Nashville, you will lose all the road back to Chattanooga and possibly have to abandon the line of the Tennessee. Should he attack you it is all well, but if he does not you should attack him before he fortifies. Arm and put in the trenches your quartermaster employees, citizens, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 2, 1864.⁠—1:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>With your citizen employees armed, you can move out of Nashville with all your army and force the enemy to retire or fight upon ground of your own choosing. After the repulse of Hood at Franklin, it looks to me that instead of falling back to Nashville we should have taken the offensive against the enemy where he was. At this distance, however, I may err as to the best method of dealing with the enemy. You will now suffer incalculable injury upon your railroads if Hood is not speedily disposed of. Put forth therefore every possible exertion to attain this end. Should you get him to retreating give him no peace.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 5, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Is there not danger of Forrest moving down the Cumberland to where he can cross it? It seems to me whilst you should be getting up your cavalry as rapidly as possible to look after Forrest, Hood should be attacked where he is. Time strengthens him in all possibility as much as it does you.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 6, 1864⁠—4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Attack Hood at once and wait no longer for a remnant of your cavalry. There is great danger of delay resulting in a campaign back to the Ohio River.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 8, 1864.⁠—8:30 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Your dispatch of yesterday received. It looks to me evident the enemy are trying to cross the Cumberland River, and are scattered. Why not attack at once? By all means avoid the contingency of a foot race to see which, you or Hood, can beat to the Ohio. If you think necessary call on the governors of States to send a force into Louisville to meet the enemy if he should cross the river. You clearly never should cross except in rear of the enemy. Now is one of the finest opportunities ever presented of destroying one of the three armies of the enemy. If destroyed he never can replace it. Use the means at your command, and you can do this and cause a rejoicing that will resound from one end of the land to the other.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">City Point, <abbr class="postal">Va.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 11, 1864.⁠—4 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>If you delay attack longer the mortifying spectacle will be witnessed of a rebel army moving for the Ohio River, and you will be forced to act, accepting such weather as you find. Let there be no further delay. Hood cannot even stand a drawn battle so far from his supplies of ordnance stores. If he retreats and you follow, he must lose his material and much of his army. I am in hopes of receiving a dispatch from you today announcing that you have moved. Delay no longer for weather or reinforcements.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-location">Washington, <abbr class="postal">D.C.</abbr>,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">December 15, 1864.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Major-General Thomas,</p>
							<p>Nashville, Tenn.</p>
						</header>
						<p>I was just on my way to Nashville, but receiving a dispatch from Van Duzer detailing your splendid success of today, I shall go no further. Push the enemy now and give him no rest until he is entirely destroyed. Your army will cheerfully suffer many privations to break up Hood’s army and render it useless for future operations. Do not stop for trains or supplies, but take them from the country as the enemy have done. Much is now expected.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">U. S.</abbr> Grant,</p>
							<p>Lieutenant-General.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-60.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See orders to Major-General Meade, Ord, and Sheridan, March 24th, Appendix. <a href="chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Transcriber’s Note: The old name for what we now call a Migraine Headache. D.W. <a href="chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Appendix. <a href="chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>22d <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
